The university is organized into departments, such as the Dept. of Computing Science (CS), and study programmes for students, such as the Computer Science and Engineering programme (CSEP). Programmes are hosted by departments, but several departments may collaborate on a programme, which is the case with CSEP that is co-hosted by the CS department and the Department of Computer Engineering (CE). Department names and programme names are unique.

Each study programme is further divided into branches, for example CSEP has branches Computer Languages, Algorithms, Software Engineering etc. A student always belongs to a programme and a branch. Note that branch names are unique within a given program, but not necessarily across several programs. For instance, both CSEP and a programme in Automation Technology could have a branch called Interaction Design. For each study programme, there are mandatory courses. For each branch, there are additional mandatory courses that the students taking that branch must read. Branches also name a set of recommended courses from which all students taking that branch must read a certain amount to fulfil the requirements of graduation, see below.

Courses are given by a department (e.g. CS gives the Databases course), and may be read by students reading any study programme. Some courses may be mandatory for certain programmes, but not so for others. Some, but not all, courses have a restriction on the number of students that may take the course at the same time. Each course gives a certain number of credits. For simplicity we assume all students get the same amount of credits for a given course, regardless of which study programme or branch they belong to. Courses can be classified as being mathematical courses, research courses or seminar courses. Not all courses need to be classified, and some courses may have more than one classification. Some courses have prerequisites, i.e. other courses that must be read before a student is allowed to register for the course at hand.

Students need to register for courses in order to read them. To be allowed to register, the student must first fulfil all prerequisites for the course. It should not be possible to register to a course unless the prerequisite courses are already passed. It should not be possible for a student to register for a course which they have already passed.

If a course becomes full, subsequent registering students are put on a waiting list, and if one of the previously registered students decides to drop out, that slot on the course is given to the student who has waited the longest. When the course is finished, all students are graded on a scale of 'U', '3', '4', '5'. Getting a 'U' means the student has not passed the course, while the other grades denote various degrees of success.